---
category: personal
date: '2006-06-12'
---

Back from Brazil
================

We\'re back from Brazil and had a fabulous time. Thais\' family is
awesome and that country is just gorgeous. I haven\'t been terribly
social since our return, I apologize! I uploaded pictures of the
honeymoon, reception, and wedding to the [new photo
gallery](http://picasaweb.google.com/whiteinge/Honeymoon).

[Nat](http://erinat.com/blog/) mailed me wondering \"Where on [Google
Earth](http://earth.google.com/) Are You?\" and I had so much fun
looking over all the places we visited that I put Google Earth links
below if you care to see them.

Thais is from the southern-most state in Brazil, Rio Grande do Sul,
which is [heavily populated by German
immigrants](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German-Brazilian). Her parents
are living in a little town named [Harmonia](./Harmonia.kmz)
![ge](google_earth_link.gif), population 2,000, which is 90%
German-speaking. The townsfolk are largely farmers or factory workers
and are pretty suspicious of strangers. We were visiting during an
annual town celebration (pictured), announced by a loud- speaker on a
car that drove around for a week beforehand, and the people were much
more sociable then. I was approached a number of times and had to
respond that I did not speak Portuguese, and every time was asked, \"Oh,
then do you speak German?\" The
[gaucho](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gauchos) (people from southern
Brazil) music and folk dancing are very derivative of German folk music
and dancing.

Rio Grande do Sul is famous for shoes, furniture, and chocolate that are
exported all over the world. We visited another German town called [Novo
Hamburgo](./NovoHamburgo.kmz) ![ge](google_earth_link.gif) (\'Novo\'
means \'New\') specifically to buy new shoes - we weren\'t disapointed
with the selection. :-)

[Gramado](./Gramado.kmz) ![ge](google_earth_link.gif) (pictured),
similarly, is famous for chocolate. The town is very reminiscent of Park
City - but German-er - complete with high, touristy, prices; a film
festival; cold weather and high altitude.

A few times a week we\'d make the hour-and-a-half drive into the capital
city of Rio Grande do Sul, [Porto Alegre](./PortoAlegre.kmz)
![ge](google_earth_link.gif). for shopping and business. Thais\' family
recycles plastics so I got to tour a couple plastic factories, one of
which makes the plastic for the soles of (famous) shoe brands. It was
very cool to see.

To finish the trip we spent only a couple days in Rio de Janeiro
\<RiodeJaneiro.kmz\> ![ge](google_earth_link.gif) The city is very
beautiful, but many parts are very impovershed and dangerous. The
largest slum we drove past spanned the entire side of a mountain and is
populated by 80,000 people. The famous beaches there, Copacabana and
Ipanema, we\'re pretty gorgeous and warm even though we visited in the
late fall. The big Jesus statue, [Cristo Redentor](./CristoRedentor.kmz)
![ge](google_earth_link.gif) (pictured) that looks over the city was
pretty awesome, and visible from almost everywhere. (The Google Earth
topographical data for Rio de Janeiro seems suspect to me, the mountain
that the statue sits atop is much more dramatic in person.) Next visit
we\'d like to spend more time there to see the (seemingly) countless
statues and monuments we drove past.

Archived Comments
-----------------

Tiago

:   Tudo estava muito bom!!!!!!!!!!

    Saudades!!!!1

Juliana

:   Beautiful pictures... (Thaís translate for you, ok?! Sorry...)
    Lindas as fotos de vocês! Foi muito bom conhece-los...espero que
    voltem em breve, para passarmos o natal juntos! Ah, o Tiago pode ser
    o papai noel...

    Abraços, Ju

whiteinge

:   Ha, ha! Tiago will be papai noel gordo!

zambia

:   Amiga Ise!!! estou emocionada por ver tu tão feliz no casamento,
    parece de pincesa!!!!

    cheguei a chorar, acredita pois sou testemunha da tua luta e
    prerceverança de chegar, até ai se formar. bom e um casamento lindo
    desde fechou co chave de ouro!!!muitas felicidades amiga1!!

    as pessoas ( cristiane a crente a pri...) perguntao direto de ti. Só
    dou o site se tu permitir...

    MANDA O TEU E-MAIL E EU TE CONVIDO PARA ORKUT, E MANTEMOS CONTADO
    DIRETO, ME ESCREVE ISE!!!!! NÃO ESQUECE DE MIM

    BEIJOS QUE DEUS TE ILUMINE CADA VEZ MAIS

    ZAMBIA

zambia

:   e ai, amiga resonde de uma vez!!!!!

Thais

:   Zambinha,

    Obrigada pelo comentario tao lindo. Que pena que nao pude falar
    contigo e te ver quando fui ao Brasil.

    Te amo muito minha amigona, diz para a Cris e para a Pri, que elas
    podem olhar meu site sim e tambem me mandarem emails. Vai ser legal.
    Como entro no Yokurt?

    Beijos, Ise e marido
