TITLE({"Textpattern"})
CATEGORY({"computing, web"})
DATE({"2005-10-26"})

Textpattern
===========

Although I have no qualms with WordPress, I\'ve always been very curious
about [Textpattern](http://textpattern.com/) since it is made by the
people who freely gifted [A Humane Web Text
Generator](http://textism.com/tools/textile/) on the undeserving web.

Despite having a WordPress database importer there were a few problems.
Excerpts, links, and categories either did not make it through or were
mangled. The content transition was otherwise convenient.

Textpattern appeals to professional bloggers and publishers since it
allows for the customization of almost everthing it outputs to a browser
and can seem downright unfriendly at times. Plugins and themes are not
the drop-in additions found in other blogging software and take a little
time to install even for seasoned web workers. The theming engine is
simple enough, custom XHTML namespaced tags allow the expected insertion
of content from the database. Although these tags are numerous,
Textpattern has solid documentation and community support. Of the few
prepackaged themes I installed all of them seemed unnecessarily complex
evidenced by huge, detailed INSTALL files that required overwriting the
current theme (or painstakingly copying each relevant code from the
\'pages\', \'forms\', and \'style\' menus). Additionally the \'Forms\'
menu was typically broken into almost a dozen seperate sections.

CSS, Javascript, plugins, and theme structure are all stored in the
database which make quick edits by a console-jockey impossible which is
the feature that bothered me most. However, the admin interface is
quickly navigable once you\'re familiar with Textpattern\'s semantic
naming peculiarities and it even features an integrated CSS editor of
sorts.

Uploading files and images happily allows the addition of categorization
and meta information but callously renames the uploads to a sequential,
meaningless number that requires use of the CMS(Content Management
System) to decypher.

It seems to me that Textpattern is an unfinished CMS teetering on the
edge of greatness. If I wanted absolute, professional control over my
site I would likely switch permanently. Most notably the team needs to
work on packaging themes which would go a long way to bringing
Textpattern more web-hobbiest than web-professional.
