:date: 2004-11-08
:category: computing, os x

===============
Apple's Keynote
===============

When I'm on the verge of buying a Mac I tend to get a little obsessive.
`Erik`_'s had to physically restrain me once or twice. So here's a telling of
my favorite Mac presentation experience to help me vent.

A presentation for a college class I was taking warranted a PowerPoint visual
aid. Since everyone else was using one it would look half-assed if you didn't
slap *something* together. PowerPoint is akin to a 60-year-old man who looks
100 due to years of smoking, malnutrition, and neglect. Also I honestly
believe that for the public good Microsoft needs to hard-code a provision
into the next version of PowerPoint explicitly disallowing the use of `Comic
Sans`_ in any presentation under any circumstances.

Our teacher requested that anyone requiring the projector set up before class
to minimize situations such as: "Sorry everyone, I'm not sure what's ? let
see ? it was working earlier ? well I guess I'll just have to reboot." After
watching a myriad of uninspired, plain, illegible mockeries of color and form
it came to be my turn. I stode to the front with my Powerbook in hand, lid
closed, Apple logo facing the class, effortlessly hanging from it's
industrial strength aluminum handle. Then I placed it on the table amidst the
graveyard of plastic wintel laptops and opened the lid. In the second-
and-a-half of time it took for the screen to light and the machine to wake I
had plugged the projector into the VGA port. Another second-and-a-half and
Keynote's opening slide appeared on the big-screen. I clicked play and we
were off!

This `Keynote`_ presentation was comprised of a gorgeous Apple template;
anti-aliased text and drop shadows where appropriate; dithered, variable,
alpha-channel transparency for the graphics; and hardware-accelerated slide
transitions both 2D and 3D.

After it was finished, I unplugged the projector, closed the lid and the
Powerbook was swiftly asleep and safe for transport. As I made my way back to
my seat, leaving the unsightly wintel table alone with only the repugnant
company of each other, one of the students spoke up, "Hey was that that new
Apple PowerPoint thing?" I gave him a knowing, curt nod, "Keynote? Yeah."

I'd like to think that I really made a difference in a few people's lives
that day. But maybe I'm just being `pretentious`_. ;-)



.. _Erik: http://bobzrkr.org/
.. _Comic Sans: http://bancomicsans.com/
.. _Keynote: http://www.apple.com/keynote/
.. _pretentious: http://www.despair.com/pretension.html
