TITLE({"Powerbook Upgrades"})
CATEGORY({"computing, os x"})
DATE({"2004-12-23"})

Powerbook Upgrades
==================

I got a new Mac.

Well not really, but I thought it'd be funny given my somewhat [less
than
decisive](http://eseth.org/archives/2004/10/26/os-x-vs-linux-and-linux-on-laptops/)
history. I did, however, upgrade my RAM. from the stock 256 MB to 768
MB.

Why Apple considers 256 MB of RAM acceptable for OS X I'll never
understand, in fact, the minimum system requirements call for 128 MB
(version 10.3). I have an old G3 iMac with 192 MB and the only thing it
does these days is record TV. It'll run Safari and barely runs
Microsoft Word, but I wouldn't call it usable. My new 12" Powerbook
came with 256 MB and couldn't really run anything without constantly
paging-out. Forget quickly switching between a running Firefox and a
running iTunes (not small programs) without accessing the disk,
especially if you have a few tabs open in Firefox. Personally, I prefer
using a remote Firefox over an SSH-forwarded X Windows in that situation
and only using Safari to view the few types of multimedia that
[plugger](http://fredrik.hubbe.net/plugger.html) has problems with.

Now that I'm running 768 MB it feels like a whole new machine.
Switching between Firefox and iTunes is seamless (and I happen to be
running the World of Warcraft installer as well). I'm certainly pickier
than the average computer user, and probably *way* pickier than the
average Mac user--I guess I just wish Apple's RAM wasn't so expensive
when you're buying a new system.
