:date: 2007-01-01
:category: computing

===========================
Sling laptop bags, a review
===========================

It seems that most reviews for the two popular MacBook sling bags
consist of the manufacturer’s promotional text, verbatim. WTF? Making a
decision on a laptop bag for me is second only to the decision on the
laptop itself. I’m going to be carrying that thing around every day for
the next couple years - it had better be comfortable and do what I need.

I bought the Sling Blade Runner
<http://www.mac-case.com/MacCase%20Slings.htm> from MacCase based on the
single unbiased-sounding review I could find. This bag is way bigger
than a MacBook, don’t be fooled by slightly misleading quotes on the
official page - it fits a MacBook Pro after all. My favorite thing about
sling bags is that you can swing them under your arm and hold them in
front of your body to get at the contents without setting them down or
having stuff fall out (see the photo). The Sling Blade Runner isn’t
designed to allow this type of mobile access since the two main pockets
are facing away from each-other - one pocket is always face-down when
the other is face-up.

So I returned MacCase’s sling bag and bought an Everki Fling Light
<http://www.everki.com/pages-pubs_product_bag_info/product-66/fling-light-laptop-sling-pack.html?zenid=344c5744480343a87cad989a85a05a6a>.
I couldn’t be happier with this bag. Not only does is allow for the
quick, mobile-access described above but it has total ten little pockets
for various small items (e.g. Nintendo DS, MacBook remote, earphones,
glasses, eye-drops, external mouse, AV(audio-visual) cables) so there’s
little excuse to have loose things jumbling around inside your bag. The
main pocket has two velcro dividers allowing you to customize the space
for your laptop perfectly (the MacBook is an awesome, snug fit!). The
dividers allow you to make use of all that extra space, if you have a
small laptop, by creating even more pockets (I use mine for the power
adapter).

If you’re looking for a sling laptop bag with enough extra room for a
school-book or two, the MacCase Blade Runner will fit the bill nicely.
If you’re looking for a sling laptop bag to comfortably and securely
hold your laptop and all the little things that come with a laptop you
will not be disappointed by the Everki Fling Light.

Archived Comments
=================

Matt
    Oh, yes—if it has a nice spot for the DS it has to be good!

    Also, it’s nice to see you back—and who’s that young guy in the picture
    with yer bag?

    ;)

Matt
    Ok, so it’s the kid from the product page…you need a picture of YOU
    modeling your acquisition.

whiteinge
    You’re totally right, Matt, I oughta at least crop-out that guy’s face
    before someone gets the wrong idea… :-) (And thanks for the welcome-back!)
